title: Wohpe
date: 2024-07-24 17:50
tags: books, scifi 
summary: Some notes about Wohpe, the novel by antirez
---

We recently returned from our traditional Dolomites vacancy period, and while there
I eventually managed to read the first novel written by [Salvatore
Sanfilippo](http://invece.org/) aka `antirez`.  Most of you probably know
Salvatore because he has been for a long time the leading developer of
[Redis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Redis) until he came out from the company
that now holds the ownership of the project, some years ago. He often compared
the creative work of a developer with that of a novelist and I was curious about
his first book. 

First of all, he probably started to write that novel in 2019, and I bought it
in October of 2022, largely before the ChatGPT and the AI hype. Therefore, it cannot be
considered an _instant book_, written after some big public event, just to ride
the wave. It has been written by antirez after two years of efforts and refinements.

## Wohpe

The novel is a sci-fi book centered mainly on a couple of interesting
themes, climate change and General Artificial Intelligence. Wohpe is the contraction
of _world hope_ and the whole story deals with the central idea of using advanced
self-aware AI to find the [silver bullet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silver_bullet) 
to manage the climate change that, in a distopic vision of a not-so-far future, shall 
cause a certain extinction of humanity.

The novel deals with the long months of development of a large neural network that is so
big to reach the fictional threshold of self-awareness and become so intelligent
to possibly find a final solution to the climatic catastrophe.

I will not give more details about the plot to avoid too much spoiling for people interested
in reading the novel themselves.

Fun fact: Wohpe is also the name of the [spirit of Peace](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wohpe) 
for the Lakota people - a Sioux tribe - and that could be not so casual after reading the book.

##  About the book

I found the writing style in some way very similar to that of classic sci-fi novelists
I like, such as Isaac Asimov. If you read the classic _Foundation trilogy_, you can recognize
the same slow times of development, with sudden improvements in the narration 
until the climax of the novel. 

A style I personally like, but a lot of people dislike, as well. That motivates probably 
some negative comments I read about the book, considered too slow or full of unnecessary details
that render some parts of the story heavy. I found instead the book well-balanced and
of course with the reasonable amount of technical details about AI technologies that one
could expect by antirez. We are nerds, after all.

I found a lot of the story well-centered and convincing about a possible future for 
AI applications that are presently at their very beginning. 

The story focuses on AI applications, which are currently in their infancy, is
both compelling and thought-provoking. It presents a convincing and potentially
realistic future for those technologies, which I found to be a fascinating
aspect of the book. Even, antirez's undoubted technical competence ensure a
well-constructed scenario for their applications, with the right weighting of
details and no improbable or too imaginative ideas about the reality
of neural networks.

Even in a distopic context, the book is positively optimistic, maybe too
much for my inclination. 
I would like to share antirez's faith in human capabilities of dealing
effectively with events that largely go beyond the knowledge and understanding 
of the average individual, as well as the possibility for single individuals
to be relevant for humanity fate.

Let me discuss now the two main topics of the book and my personal ideas
about them.

## Artificial Intelligence, the next revolution

The hypothesis of a theoretical network size limit (or number of parameters) 
for self-awareness it too simple to be true, but a fascinating one, indeed.
But for that, most of the applications of AI as described in the book are practically
possible in the next future, maybe even before the next 10 or 20 years term: in
some contexts, things will change heavily in maybe less than 5 years, in my
vision for the next future on those regards.

The idea that the AI shall improve effectively the quality of life of human beings,
after a period of adjustments and a mixture of hope and fear for the new wave,
is a credible scenario. We already saw the same for Internet in the latest dozens of
years, another technology that changed the lifes and jobs of a large part of people in many
countries. I predicted the Internet revolution in the beginning of 90s, I'm quite sure 
that even in this case, I will be right: _if_ an excessive regulation 
(driven by human fear of novelties) will not dismantle the whole thing at the very beginning, 
which could be one of the possibilities in this crazy world.

## Climate change, the next challenge

I am more worried about the implication of the climate change in the medium term for humanity.
We already are missing the inital goal of limiting the increase in average
temperatures under 1.5°C before 2050, and I seriously doubt that our
models can predict effectively changes in our daily life 
that we will have to deal with in the next few years. 

We seriously could face big problems in many parts of the world a lot of 
time before a Wohpe can help us. And on those regards we are not brilliant in
predicting disasters and acting effectively. We are generally and simply
regretting - disaster after disaster - for what we did not do instead.

Here in the Mediterranean area, we already are experiencing hot summers with
weeks of continuous high temperatures and humidity, reduced rain (even during
the winter) in many urban areas, as never seen until a few years ago.
Unfortunately, for the average citizen, it seems a problem of someone else, with
even a sense of nuisance for the few initiatives adopted to limit the worldwide
CO2 production.

Under those regards, we have not a better attitude than that of the silly folks
shown in the [_Don't Look Up!_](https://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_Look_Up)
movie, just waiting for the meteorite.

I don't know if an AI can help us with all that. For sure, I would
prefer that people generally be aware of the problem and all 
work as a consequence even in their daily lives.


