title: My geeky email setup explained to humans
date: 2025-02-16 11:00
mastodon: https://floss.social/@gisgeek/114013066588462793
tags: tools, configurations, personal computing
summary: About my setup to read and send emails
---

Being an [ancient
mariner](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Rime_of_the_Ancient_Mariner) in the
virtual ocean of the Big Network, I started using emails at the very beginning
of the Internet era (at least here in Italy) on a 
[SunOS pizza box](https://blog.pizzabox.computer/pizzaboxes/sparcstation/), 
which I used at the time as my primary workstation. That was a giant step ahead
for me because my first serious use of email in 1991 was on a Digital VT220
terminal under VMS OS and its MAIL client (who remembers the old times of DCL?).
At that time, I started using Elm as my Mail User Agent, a software that stopped
being developed in the first few years of this millennium.

In 1995, a new attractive MUA started to be developed, and it fascinated my geek
inclination: as any smart enough reader can well imagine, it was
[Mutt](https://www.mutt.org/), and as anyone knows, it still _sucks less_ as a
MUA, and it is nonetheless being developed after almost thirty years. Nowadays,
colleagues and friends are always perplexed when they see me still reading and
answering emails on a terminal in text mode, but I never found serious
motivation to change my email workflow and prefer a graphical MUA instead. I
occasionally use a smartphone with K-Mail (now Thunderbird), but I like reading
and writing emails on one of my GNU/Linux PCs.

First of all, my mailboxes are read by or received in a single box (let's call
it [the Collector](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Collector), with
appropriate local backup), permanently connected to the network. It also
provides SMTP/IMAP services and a last-resort spam filtering capability, thanks
to Spamassassin+Razor and Procmail rules. Mailboxes are provided by third-party
services, including (but not exclusively) a series of GMail and MS accounts, and
that box is able to communicate with each of them to regularly read new
messages, thanks to Fetchmail.  Any of my PCs can then connect with the
Collector to read remotely archived emails via IMAP and send answers and new
messages through any of the legitimate SMTP servers associated with each email
account I use: that is because of the SPF/DKIM specs used for all email boxes
nowadays.

The Collector archives and rotates multiple mailboxes monthly and yearly,
including the main one, where all urgencies are automatically routed when they
arrive. I use multiple email accounts for mailing list subscriptions, so many
messages are automatically routed off the main track on purpose. For ages, many
bad MUAs out there only send HTML emails, so I occasionally use some graphical
helper to browse some of them. The result is a long period archive of emails
over the last 30 years that I occasionally purge of the mailing list messages to
reduce the storage load. Eventually, I use `Notmuch` to dive into tons of
Maildir mailboxes accumulated on the Collector, and that is more than enough
because an ancient message is rarely required in my experience. 

Thirty years of using `Fetchmail`, `Procmail`, `Dovecot`, `Exim`, and `Mutt`
seem more than enough to explore new ways of managing emails, but my laziness
prevents me from keeping an eye on my second choice, which would be Emacs with
mu4e and `offlineimap` or `sync` to read emails in disconnected mode when
required. Note that `Mutt` has caching capability, so the initial load of the
mailboxes is a fast enough experience.
 
 Finally, I found it helpful in my setup to use other interesting tools, such as
 `lbdb,` to collect senders' addresses automatically and have them at my
 fingertips. Recently, the Collector and all clients started using Simon
 Robinson's nice `email-oauth2-proxy` as an intermediate service to access
 2FA-enabled email accounts, a reasonable complication of the original setup.

 That said, any sane geek should rigorously use a personal domain and email
 account to avoid being locked in the use of a third-party domain and storage
 limitations: there is nothing worse than having to change tons of personal
 contact emails registered in dozens of services because of the dropping of
 someone else domain (or even worse, being exposed to their changes in policies,
 features, and limitations). That has been my way in the last 30 years or so.
 For the same reason, using any webmail system to manage emails is neither
 practical nor scalable.

 Yes, I know, I'm a damn old fashioned geek, but _this is the Way._

