title: Socials, they are not your home. 
date: 2025-01-20 17:00
tags: internet, digital rights, society
summary: The social networks are not a nice place, time to depart from them
---

Recently, I participated in a brief thread on Mastodon about how to maintain
relations with people that have been built around a social network, specifically
through Facebook. This is not different for Instagram, X/Twitter, TikTok or
whatever  you prefer.

I explained that this is simply not possible because, in my experience, people
use multiple socials based on their age, technical experience, personal taste,
and even the presence of other peers in any of the existing social systems.

This post explains in long form what I think about socials and, in brief, why
you should not base your relationship life on any of them, including any
serious business, of course.

## Large social networks are an expensive game

In the last 30 or more years, a series of social networks appeared on the
Internet with different characteristics, and all of them are (or have been until
their closure) typically usable for free (as beer). Of course, they are pretty
expensive toys,  requiring a lot of servers, data centres, worldwide networks,
software and human resources. As said briefly with a joke, if they are not
selling you anything, you are the product. 

The game is clear: they are profiling your personal data and preferences to
create selective advertisement campaigns (included in the social network feed)
if you are not paying a premium charge. That could happen even if you pay for a
subscription, of course, but it is less disturbing, at least.  Moreover, those
networks also have been subject to data leaking from time to time, because of
security issues or intentionally, and probably you would not appreciate that
your personal data, telephone number, and the photo of your children/cats, or
the photo of you drunk and naked in a party ten years ago walk publicly on the
net.

If this is something you are not available to accept, avoid any not-so-free
social network, plain and clean. Of course, any of your peers (family, friends,
colleagues, any other) could have a different opinion about that. Any of them
could choose one of the many social networks out there, and those networks
leverage specifically the FOMO syndrome to collect and increase users/customers.
If any of your friends are on Facebook or Instagram, you could be captured in
the network easily because of that mass syndrome. The only way to escape is
simply not playing that game. 

## The distributed small social networks can be a solution

A viable alternative is participating in modern independent networks of small
community-based services, such as Mastodon for microblogging or Matrix for
one-to-one communications and groups.  Of course, they need to be sustained for
cost coverage, and any instance can always disappear at any time because the
admin(s) move to other interests or costs exceed what the admin(s) are available
to pay at the end of the day. They are probably not long-term solutions, but one
can always move from one instance to another when things turn down. Simply, do
not rely too much on them. And probably they will not solve the problem of
the leaking of photos of you naked and drunk in a party of ten years ago: shit happens
even on those systems.

If your major interest is ensuring privacy and security, all the protocols and
software of those distributed networks are purely FOSS, and you can always
create your own instance. Of course, again, this is not something free of cost;
you always have to consider computing resources (both cores and storage) and
your time. This is not viable for people who lack the required skills and
knowledge, but potentially, it is the only indisputable solution.

Unfortunately, after creating your own Mastodon/Matrix instance or moving to a
nice maintained instance by a trustworthy party, you still have to convince your
peers to participate in such a network, and that is the tricky part. The hard
truth is that most people do not care about abdicating their freedom and
participating in a social network as a customer. That is until the whole thing
becomes a PITA because of censorship rules, excess of advertisements,
moderation, and lack of active peers. That happened in the past for X/Twitter
and will happen again for other social networks. It is a matter of critical
mass: if the network is not large enough, you can miss a lot of your peers, and
you can do exactly nothing to solve this problem.

That is the same problem you find in IM systems. For historical reasons, most of
your peers have probably registered a Whatsapp account, much less a Telegram
one. There are even fewer with a Discord account (not that better) or something
less invasive and respectful of privacy, such as a Signal or Matrix account. The
only valid reason is that WhatsApp started in 2009, Telegram in 2013, and Signal
in 2014 and all of them, in one way or another, tried to maintain a user's
lock-in or managed to solve scalability and add features since then. 

One should ask why they all avoided systematically extending the existing XMPP
protocol soon instead of re-inventing the wheel. I'm a bad guy and think that
standardizing does not solve the problem of sustainability for such systems.
They need to lock in the users to survive.

Think if you had to use a non-standard SMTP protocol to send emails in the 90s.
That would have been an epic failure for the Internet tech community and users.
Curiously, this is not true on the current [shattered Internet](https://lovergine.com/the-shattered-internet.html), and this is the
reason for the current social nightmare.

It's not too late: let such non-distributed and proprietary networks die as soon
as possible; simply close your accounts or freeze them and move to something
more standard, distributed and human-sized. Don't care about missing out on
someone; they will come sooner or later if they share the same ideas, so why
care? And if they do NOT share the same ideas, why care?

Come on, let's free ourselves of any social dependency on closed and proprietary
networks.

And possibly, if you absolutely have to go around naked and drunk in the next
party, at least avoid that people make photos of you and publish them.


