title: The only good AI is a dead one: myth and reality of AI tooling for code
date: 2026-05-05 13:00
tags: ai, society, aiad, coding, computing, development, programming, technology
summary: A controversy about AI code quality evaluation generates some thoughts.
---

Some months ago, I participated in [this Mastodon poll](https://floss.social/@sjn@chaos.social/116062509535203478).
My thesis was that, in general, there is no presumptive quality flag that can be
added to a product, whether it was created with AI-aided tools or not. My
opinion sparked a small, heated controversy among some readers.

Labeling a product as AI-generated and expecting low-quality results is
simplistic and prejudiced. One expects that the resulting product is accepted
without review or handcrafted changes, after multiple adjustments to the LLM
prompt through an iterative process. This is clearly false in general for coding
(vibe coding, _per se_, is not a black-and-white picture; it is full of shades
of grey), but it can also be applied to other creations.

Even the use of AI tooling has hundreds of nuances, especially in many
articulated processes of creative production across multiple fields. AI tools or
not, the human contribution is still central in the process. One can abdicate to
such a role, or be fully responsible for the final result, with accurate changes
and handcrafted work based on a rough draft generated by AI. The presumption of
labeling AI helper use as a signal of low-quality production negates the
importance of the human-in-the-loop. The point is that quality should be
considered an objective aspect of any product, with or without human authoring:
having a handcrafted product is not necessarily a symptom of quality per se, and
the same goes for the opposite if the product used AI tooling at any phase of
its creation. At least for programming, we had spaghetti code for ages, well
before AI agents.

If you take a walk around GitHub and look at too many projects to enumerate,
even without any AI intervention, you will find a lot of half-finished,
incomplete, alpha-quality, obsolete, or partially working code that would need a
good number of deep refactorings to be considered for production use. That’s not
a problem with AI use; it’s simply due to the not-too-recent shift in FOSS
coding as the mainstream approach to writing programs. Opening a GitHub
portfolio assumed almost the same importance as opening a LinkedIn profile for
techies. In many cases, such proof-of-concept products have been sitting on a
developer’s shelf for years.  Today, they populate their GitHub (or any other
hub) repos, instead.

On the opposite side, one could read [a recent Antirez’s
post](https://antirez.com/news/164), which shows how much a meticulous
human-in-the-loop approach for automatic programming can be productive and
reasonable. Not secondary; such an approach should be currently considered
essential to fully admit a copyrightable contribution to existing or new code,
as explained in [Simone Aliprandi’s recent
book](/the-artificial-author-copyright-and-copyleft-in-the-ai-era.html).

In conclusion, pretending that AI tooling produces only slop is clearly
prejudicial, not different from past anti-FOSS prejudice that unpaid work done
in free time cannot be of good quality. Does it sound familiar? Sure, there are
a lot of low-quality projects out there, but again, that’s not necessarily the
case, and there are also many very good FOSS projects, created and maintained
with great care. Again, a license type and development workflow are not enough
metrics to judge software quality, nor is the use of AI sufficient for the same
purpose. And that’s true for coding as for other creative works. That’s not that
simplistic, dudes.

Guess what? 97% of 3,456 respondents in the Mastodon poll answered that an AI
mark on a product is a good idea for a presumptively low-quality design. I’m
quite sure most of them are also AI users in some form, of course, and that says
a lot about the future of this AI era and human ingenuity.
