title: Is AI driven coding the start of the end of mainstream FOSS?
date: 2026-02-04 20:00
mastodon: https://floss.social/@gisgeek/116017225591034270
tags: foss, technology, development, ai
summary: Impact of AI on FOSS development.
---

Someone on Mastodon (I’m sorry, but I don’t remember who exactly) published a
short post that pointed to a rather technical economic study of the impact of AI
on FOSS software development [1].
It is no secret that the AI debate is highly polarized, and the enthusiasts for
the current trend in AI applications in the IT domain are at least as numerous
as those who are concerned/skeptical. What is certain is that no one can, in the
long term, prospectively evaluate the impact of AI on society, particularly in
the IT world.

The main thesis of the paper is that AI-based code production will end the
mainstreaming of FOSS software, as we have learnt over the last 15-20 years. The
paper begins with well-known episodes from recent history (specifically, the
Tailwind saga [2] and Stack Overflow's near-death experience [3]).

Of course, the paper presents a theoretical economic model to evaluate a
possible impact scenario for the FOSS production model, which could or could not
come to fruition, depending on the assumptions made.

My honest opinion is that a conscious and accurate use of AI can accelerate
development. That is, in a bad and good sense, I mean directly on the basis of
the experience and skills of people who use such models. Therefore, we are both
seeing slop and high-profile creations with the aid of AI. Maybe slop contributions
are more prevalent simply because mediocre developers are the majority, and
mediocrity is the backbone of enterprise production (because it is the most
replicable and independent of contributors and their capacities).

Like it or not, modern software industries do not need, and fight against, too
much creative approaches. Enterprises need _aurea mediocritas_, not isolated
geniuses. Also, depending on third-party creations, it apparently reduces the
enterprise's technical debt because it is typically shifted onto someone else's
shoulders. Of course, this is an approach that works until it fails miserably when such
a third party disappears, changes its license model, changes its mind about the
product, changes its APIs, and so on.

That said, one clear consequence of using AI helpers in coding appears to be the
progressive disappearance of many packages, modules, and libraries, which can be
easily replaced by AI-generated creations tailored to the task. Just to cite one
practical example, Tailwind nowadays could be easily replaced by CSS and simple
JavaScript components, with the obvious advantage of not depending on yet
another third-party-controlled piece of code that could be subject to abrupt
changes from one version to another without notice and break existing codebases.
At the same time, Tailwind themes can be generated by AI without even consulting 
its documentation (which apparently had an immediate impact on the company's revenues).

Another advantage is that AI-based, tailored solutions would reduce the amount
of code from external dependencies that solve problems for others, instead of
focusing on the minimal set of features for your own needs (with all the
implications of possible breakages arising from such an anti-minimalistic
pattern).

Of course, using AI helpers in this way does not reduce the effort required to
understand and create new software, but it probably raises the required
competence to a higher level, which could be better in the long term, while
encouraging quick-and-dirty approaches in the near term. The so-called _vibe
coding_ is not a black-and-white concept; it has a lot of grey tones directly
depending on the awareness, responsibility, and skills of the developer: as
said, it can accelerate in many senses - even to crash against a wall -
increasing in an uncontrolled manner the technical debt when in the hands of the
wrong individual. Even about that, Anthropic recognizes that AI abuse 
can negatively impact coding skills and debugging capabilities [6].

Add to this the current very high infrastructure load many networks are
reporting, for which the AI bots currently seem to be the culprit [4]. This
seems like very strange behavior for such botnets, given that web crawlers have
been around since the 90s and should be able to handle infrastructure load
fairly well by now. It seems that AI companies simply aren't fair enough on
their own, or that the training phases of neural nets are definitely more
demanding. Maybe both?

So, what do I see as the future for FOSS development as a whole? I am not a
pessimist as in the cited article. For sure, I see fewer small contributions in
the long term. Today, there is a massive production of AI-slop-based
contributions to many prime-time projects, but I see this as incidental. In
recent years, GitHub-based _path of honors_ has been a major self-promotion
channel for junior developers, which explains the drift toward low-quality
contributions: devs are (were?) strongly motivated to contribute and find in AI
slop an easy path to that, by creating personal portfolios. That’s also true for
fake security-related reports (see the well-known Curl project case [5] and others).
This is, of course, annoying, but in my view, that’s the result of current AI
hype and should normalize in the mid-term.

Also, in the near future, I see less and less relevance in FOSS projects that
are not sustained by a strong architectural idea, innovation-grade, a large
community, and a consistent development effort (much bigger than a few weeks or
months of work).  That kind of project will become mainly background noise, let
me say. Maybe that could impact whole categories of FOSS software: it is not a
secret that many language hubs are full of packages/modules of dubious quality,
often used because they are available just a use/import directive away. In many
cases, such products will simply be replaced by an AI-based reimplementation. If
the final result will be better or worse in average quality, only the future
will show. For sure, the AIAD will cause a progressive
_democratization/popularization_ of the development process, giving average
users access to possibilities once unavailable to them: we will probably see the
production of a plethora of small tools and workflows built on agents rather
than finished, refined products, like it or not.

The result could be an increase in FOSS products at the cost of lower average
generality and code quality, with a few high-end, tailored products for
mainstream applications instead. But was this really so different in the past? I
don’t think so. The true difference is probably the increase in quantity in both
sets of products, as potentiated by AI tools: if one does not do her/his
homework, the result is clearly garbage, but that was true before AI, too.


  _“AI gives us the worst and the best - simultaneously.”_

  _(Daniel Stenberg, the Curl Mantainer)_

## References

1. [Vibe Coding Kills Open Source](https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.15494).
2. [Tailwind Labs Lays Off Engineers, Citing the ‘Brutal Impact’ of AI](https://www.eweek.com/news/tailwind-labs-lays-off-engineers-due-to-ai/).
3. [Dramatic drop in Stack Overflow questions as devs look elsewhere for help](https://www.devclass.com/ai-ml/2026/01/05/dramatic-drop-in-stack-overflow-questions-as-devs-look-elsewhere-for-help/4079575).
4. [OpenStreetMap is concerned: thousands of AI bots are collecting data](https://www.heise.de/en/news/OpenStreetMap-is-concerned-thousands-of-AI-bots-are-collecting-data-11157359.html).
5. [Death by a thousand slops](https://daniel.haxx.se/blog/2025/07/14/death-by-a-thousand-slops/).
6. [How AI assistance impacts the formation of coding skills](https://www.anthropic.com/research/AI-assistance-coding-skills).
